A mo sruith co ber breith for dochuru

dochuru - acc. pl. "disadvantageous contract"

"oh my venerable [one] how should/shall I judge on disadvantageous
contracts"

*****

.i. a mo sai in raith ɫ a mo sai in raid, ɫ a mo sai is mo raides
firinne.

a mo sai - sai -> suí + gen. "expert/master" of

raith - "properity" or ráth "surety"

in raid - "of the statement"

is mo raides firinne - "which is my ? of justice" ráides see fecht DIL
F 53.077

".i. oh my master of surety(?), or o my master of maxim, or o my ? of
justice"

*****

cindus berat-sa mo breithemnus forani os dicurtha as,

cindus - cindas (neut) "how" see GOI sec 457-8

berat-sa - 1) pres. indic. 3rd pl. "they bear"
           2) pres subj. 3rd pl. "they may bear"
           3) fut. 3rd pl. "they shall bear"

breithemnus - breithemnas "judgment"

forani - for (prep.) + a^N (rel.) + í "on that/which the aforementioned"

os - pres. "above/over" w/dat.

dicurtha - ?

"how do/should/shall they bear my judgement on that which is
aforementioned over ? out of it"

*****

cuir na memar a necmais na cend?

cuir - "put, place, contract(?)"

na - pl. art.

memar - from mem(m)ar "member of a community, tenant"

necmais - n-ecmais "absence"

na cend - "of the head"

"the tenats contract when [there is] an absence of the head [chief?]"

*****

Bunad cundartha na memar a fiadnaise na cenn amal bunad cunnartha na
cenn budein.

Bunad - from búan (búanad) "act of perpetuating"

cundartha - from cundrad "contract, pact"

na memar - "the members"

a - nas. rel. see GOI sec 499

fiadnaise - (fíadnaise) "evidence, attestation"

na cenn - "of the head"

amal - "as, like" following nas. rel.

budien - fadéin "self"

"perpetuating the contract of the tenants that the witness of the
chief as perpetuating the contract of the cheif himself"

*****

cuitid fesa ⁊ trebairi ⁊ bunad cunnartha do cunnarthaib na memar a
fiadnaise na cenn amal bunad cunnartha na cen budein.

cuitid - "shares, participates"

fesa - "cattle tresspass" or "entertainment"

trebairi - "securety, guarantee"

bunad - "act of perpetuating"

cunnartha - "contract, bargin"

do - "to/for"

cunnarthaib - dat. pl. "contracts"

na memar - "of the tenants"

a - rel. nas.

fiadnaise - "witness"

na cenn - "of the chief"

ama - "like/as"

budein - "himself"

"he shares entertainment and security and perpetuating a contraact to
the contracts of the tenants which the wintess of the head like
perpetuating the contracts of the heads themselves"

*****

cuitid anfesa ⁊ nemtrebairi ⁊ bunad cunnartha do coraib na memar a
fiadnaise na cenn amal bunad cunnartha na memar ina fiadnaise

anfesa - "ignorance"

nemtrebairi - nem- (un-) "secure"

corais - "puttings/contracts"

ina - "in the"

"he shares ignorance and insecurity and prepetuating contracts for
contracts of the tenants which the witness of the chief like
perpetuating the contracts of the tenants in the witness."

*****

Can asa ngabar sin

ngabar - pass 3rd sing. of gabaid "take"

"whence has that been taken"

*****

Is as gabar da racad nech .s. in cinn ina ecmais .s. nech eli ar
daigin maithisa ris,

as - prep "out of"

gabar - pass 3rd sing "been taken"

da-r-acad (ad-gab) - ?

nech - "anyone"

in cinn - "of the head"

ina ecmais - "in his absence"

eli - ele "other"

ar daigin - "because of, for the sake of"

maithisa - "good, goodness" (noun rather than adj)

ris - "news, tidings" (f)ris?

*****

is ar .x.maid tic fuithib ⁊ ar .x.maid tic fo diubairt anfesa ina fiadnaise,

is - copula

ar - prep "for"

tic - "come" ? or do-icc?

fuithib - dat. pl. ?

fo - prep "under"

diubairt - "defrauding, cheating"

anfesa - gen. sing. "of ignorance"

ina - "in his"

fiadnaise - "witness"

*****

amail is coibes in re tic fo bunad cunnartha fein ina ecmais ⁊ fo diubairt anfesa ina fiadnaise,

amail - "like"

is - copula

coibes - "equal amount"

in re - "space, interval, lapse of time"

tic - "come"? or do-icc

fo bunad - "under" / "original stock"

cunnartha - "contract, bargin"

fein - "himself"

ina ecmais - "in his absence"

fo diubairt - "under fraud"

anfesa - "ignorance"

"as is an equal amount the interval(?) under original stock of the
contract and under fraud of ignorance in his witness"

*****

cubaid de-side ciama coibes in re cisa ticfad fo bunad cunnartha a
memar ina ecmais ⁊ 

cubaid - "in accord, agreeing"

de-side - "from this"

ciama - cia + ma(?) "although if"?

in re - "space, interval"

coibes - "equal amount"

cisa - gen. sing. "tax, tribute"

ticfad - 3rd sing. conditional prototonic of do-icc see GOI 513(b)

fo bunad - "under original stock"

cunnartha - "contract, bargin"

a - "his"

memar - "tenants"

ina ecmais - "in his absence"

"an agreeing for this although if(?) the interval of tax would come under original stock of a contract of his tenants in his absence and"

*****

fo diubairt anfesa ina fiadnaise

diubairt - from díupart "defrauding"

anfesa - "ignorance"

ina - "in the"

fiadnaise - "witness, testimony"

"under unknowing fraud in the witness"

*****

cor saercheli flatha on trath coraili

cor - "contract"

saercheli - "of a free client"

flatha - "of a lord"

on trath coraili - "until the same time next day" see DIL T 275.008

"a contract of a free client of a lord until the same time next day"

*****

Cor cach maic sarleithe ⁊ cach fir don finechairi ar .iii.

cor - "contract"

maic saerleithe - "emanicpated son" DIL S 10.005

don - "for the/to the"

finechairi - "faulty-kin"

ar - "on"

"a contract of an emancipated son for the faulty-kin on three(?)"

*****

Cor manaig riagalta sech apaid co iar .n.ti

Cor - "a contract"

manaig - gen. "of a church tenant"

riagalta - "devout" adj. io-ia stem

sech - prep "beyond/without"

apaid - "abbot" gen. sing.

cor iar - "until after"

"a contract of a devout church tenant without an abbot until after
three months"

*****

cor apad sech a marchu co iar .x.

"a contract of an abbo without his monks until after ten months"

*****

u.thi don apaid re tichtain fo coraib a saermanach

u.thi - "five months"

don - "for the"

apaid - "abbot" acc. sing.

re - prep "before"

tichtain - acc. sing of tíchtu "coming to"

fo - "under"

coraib - dat. pl. "contracts"

a - "his"

saermanach - "free church tenants"

"five months for the abbot before coming to his free church tenants
under contracts"

*****

⁊ a diablad-sin dona manachaib re tichtain fo coraib in apad

diablad - "double" (liability?) DIL D2 55.015

dona - "for/to the" pl.

monachaib - "the church tenants" dat. pl.

re - prep "before"

tichtain - "coming to"

fo - prep. "under"

coraib - "contracts"

in apad - "the abbot"

"and this doubling (of liability?) for the church tenants before
coming to under contracts of the abbot"

*****

Dona cenntaib atat na ree-sin adrubrumar re tiachtain fo coraib na
mball;

dona - "for the" pl.

cenntaib - "tame, domesticated"

atat - rel of at-tá "which is"

na - "the" pl.

ree-sin - "that interval"

adrubrumar - ad-ro-brumar (?) pass. verb

"for the domesticated which are [in] that peroid of time [...] before
coming to under contracts of the limbs"

*****

a diablad-sin dona ballaib re tiachtain fo coraib na cenn,

diablad-sin - "this double (liability?)"

"his double (liability?) for the limbs before coming to under the
contracts of the head,"

*****

no dā comad .x.mad do cach ball i coitcinne re tichtain fo coraib a
cinn amail ata dona manchaib.

dā comad - "two" + "keeping, guarding"

do cach ball - "for each limb"

coitcinne - "common property" DIL C 320.038

"or two keepings [...] for each limb in common property before coming
to under contracts of his head lich which is for the church tenants"

*****

A necmais na cenn doronta na cuir-sin;

necmais - n-ecmais "absence"

na cenn - "the heads"

doronta - 2nd sing. past sub. of do-gní "you may do/make"

na cuir-sin "those contracts"

"the absence of the head you may make those contracts"

*****

⁊ damad ina fiadnaise in re arbud astaiti arna duinib fen iat robad
astaiti arna cennaib

damad - conj. "if it were"

ina - "in his/the/which"

in re - "the period of time" DILL R 20.016

arbud - ar + 3rd sing. conj. imparative
        ar + 3rd sing conj. past. subj.

astaiti - "restraining" from astaithe DIL A 439.017

arna - "upon the"

duinib - dat. pl "person, people"

fen - 3rd pl. of fadéin, féin "themselves"

iad - "they"

robad - 3rd sing sec. fut. of copula

na cennaib - "upon the domesticated"

"and if it were in the witness, the period of time for which
restraining may be on the people they temslves would have been
restrained on the domesticated (animals?)"

*****

cid fodera conid sia in re iarsa tecait na memar fa coraib na cenn
'nat na cin fo coraib memar?

cid - interr. "what"

fodera - see fo-fera "causes to be done, orders" DIL F 221.080

conid - 3rd sing. "that he/it is"

sia - comparative adj of sír "longest"

in re - "of the period of time"

iarsa - "after which"

tecait - 3rd pl. "they come"

na memar - "the members"

fa - prep "under"

coraib - dat. pl. "contracts"

na cenn - "of the head"

'nat - ?

"what orders that the longer period after which the members under a
contract of a head come under contracts of a member."

*****

Is e in fath: dliged aendachta ⁊ ildachta aithfeghtar etarru, uair
aenda in cenn i leth risna membraib,

is e in fath - "it is it the reason"

dliged - "entitlement, right"

aendachta ⁊ ildachta - "singally and pluarity"

aithfeghtar - aithḟegad(?) -> aithḟegaid(?)  3rd
              pl. pres. pass. indic./subj. "they are being [may be?]
              considered"

etarru - "between them"

uair - "formrly"

aenda - (aendachta) oenda "single, unit"

in cenn - "of the head"

i leth - "in support of"

risna - ris + na (?) "before the"?

"it is it the reason: single and plurality entitlement are being [may
be?] considered, formerly single unit of the head in support before
the members"

*****

, ⁊ ilarda na memair i leth resin cenn, ⁊ doilgi don sochaide teglamad
in noeninad re re gairit

ilarda - adj. "manifold, multiplicity"

i leth - "in support"

resin cenn - "before the head"

doilgi - ia-setm f "trouble, distress"

don - "to/for the"

sochaide - "many"

teglamad - ?

in noeninad - in n-oeiniad (?)

re re - ? "before the peroid?"

gairit - "short" DIL G 46.024

"and the multitude of the members in support before the head, and
trouble for the many [?] (before a short time period?)"

*****

⁊ coir ciamadh siaite in re doib.

coir - "a putting, contract"

ciamadh - cia + madh ? "although if it is"?

siaite - sia + de "the longer"

in re - "the time period"

doib - "to/for them"

"and a contract, though if it is the longer time peroid for them"

*****

usa do-sum a oenur tiachtain re re ngairit, ⁊ coir cema gairde in re do.

Usa - DIL U 94.011 -> uisse "just, right, fitting"

do-sum - "for/to him"

a oenur - "his oneness (himself"

tiachtain - "act of coming, reaching ,taking place"

re re ngairit - "a time period before a short time"

coir - "a contract"

cema - "though if"

in re - "the time peroid"

do - "to/for him"

"just for himself a time period taking place before a short time
period and a contract though if shortness of the time period for him"
