Sureties and Pledges in the Finnṡruth Fíthail

* Introductory Remarks

This talk will focus on a small amount of text contained with the
legal dialogue Finnṡruth Fíthail.  As Fíthal is a rather unknown
character, I will give some general introductions to him and his place
in early Irish literature.  I will also discuss some textual notes on
the Finnṡruth Fíthail.  Much of this talk is based on my beginning
investigations of the text as I have not had the time to devote to it
as I would have liked.  Therefore, much of this should be taken in the
spirit of work-in-progress rather than a complete investigation.

* Introduction to the Texts

Fíthal is a mythological judge who is connected to the equally
mythological king Cormac mac Airt.  He appears in many different
places within early Irish literature.  For instance, he appears in a
Middle Irish poetic dialogue opposite Cormac mac Art (see my
forthcoming edition).  In many ways, he is comparable with Morann and
Caratina both of whom are more famous.  For more information you can
consult my thesis, which is avaliable online at
http://hdl.handle.net/1842/3320.

There are two legal texts which are attributed to Fíthal: Aí Emnach,
which appears in _Forbuis Droma Damhghaire_ (thesis page 75) but which
is now lost except for a few stray references and Finnsruth Fíthal,
the focus of this particular talk.

The Finnsruth Fíthal is preserved in two copies.  The A text, which is
in CIH 786.25--789.17, is the older of the two.  For instance, it
preserves the verbal of necessity _finnta_ from the verb ro-fitir "to
know". The A version preserves some of the original text.  However,
the MS ascelphelus and the text is cut off after only a few pages.
The B text in CIH 2131.1--2143.40 is more extensive of the two but it
is later Old Irish and Middle Irish.  More to the point, the B version
preserves only beginning sentences and contains much commentary rather
than law itself.  However, as we will see, it preserves some
interesting points of proceedure which the A version does not.

The structure of the Finnsruth Fíthal is that of a dialogue between
Fíthal and Socht, who would become Fíthal's son in later literature.
In addition to the dialogue format, each topic covered by the text is
introduced by Socht with the formula _co ber breith_ which means "how
should/shall I judge".  Roland Smith in the early 20th century
attempted to adduce this as a general rule in early Irish law but this
is assuredly not the case as the formula is too general to be pressed
into service in this way.  This dialogue structure is neatly
complemented by Gúbretha Caratniad, which also uses the dialogue
format to achieve its purpose.

More generally, many early Irish legal texts have a question and
answer format.  While the questioner and repondant are generally
anonymous, the format is one that seemed to sit comfortably within the
scholastic environment in medieval Ireland.  As others have said, much
of what we have of the early Irish legal corpus are handbooks rather
than law itself.  Here anonymous and legendary figures loom large to
validate the law and instruct students in it within the context of
universal wisdom literature (for more information see, Yocum
http://openurl.ingenta.com/content?genre=article&issn=0081-6353&volume=46&issue=1&spage=39&epage=58).

* Introduction Pledges and Sureties

Of course pledges and sureties are an integral part of any legal
system.  Even in modern legal systems, sureties are used to obtain
loans and underpin other financial transactions.  Pledges are also a
large part of the modern legal system.  For instance, when obtaining a
mortgage (a gage being a form of pledge), potential borrowers usually
must make a pledge of 10 to 20% of the mortgage's value.  This is also
known as having "skin in the game" in City parlance.

In early Irish law, pledges are items of value which are given to the
counter-party in a contract to ensure the terms of the contract are
faithfully caried out.  Pledges can be given on the behalf of another
person.  These pledges accrue intrest while they are out of the
possession of the pledgee.  If the pledge becomes forfeit the pledgee
is entitled to compensation.

Sureties and pledges are connected as they both attempt to ensure that
contracts are executed as agreed.  Unlike a pledge which is an item, a
surety puts themselves as liable for the contract if it is not
executed.  Also, they are a feature of the legal proceedure as they
are used to ensure the "paths of judgement" (see Stacey
http://lccn.loc.gov/93047677).

* Pledges and Sureties in the Finnsruth Fíthail A Text

As I am still working on the edition of the Finnsruth Fíthail, I will
focus on a couple of interesting facets of pledges and sureties as it
shows some aspects of judicial proceedure.  However, first, the
section which covers pledges is introduced as: _Co ber breith im
techtae ngill_ "how should/shall I judge concerning lawful pledges" in
the A text.  It then discusses pledges which cover situations like
restitution and how do judge pledges which are securities.  These
pledges are described as _imarcradho_ or excess goods.  The
intensifier _imar-_ is often, according to DIL (DIL I 126.052),
meaningless. In this situation, Fíthal advises that "judging security
with that should be[ ]should be like which is belonging to the pledged
object" or in other words, when judging a situation which arises out
of a disputed pledge, the judge should adjudge compensation which is
like in form to the object pledged in the first place.  This makes
sense as pledges were often intimate items to the pledgee.  For
instance a "work-bag" or an embroiderer's needles.  These objects
needed to be replaced for the person to continue with their work or
profession.  In the case of a judge it was five ounces of silver.

In this section, the Finnsruth Fíthail also discusses sureties.  In
this instance, "surety goes on heirs to the ninth generation".  This
is a rather dramatic turn from pledges to surieties and how long they
last.  Also, most contracts are not multi-generational in nature and
it raises the question as to how long a contract can be made for.
Also, while we are on the subject, a historian would be needed to
validate a suriety which lasts this long.  In terms of court
proceedure, a historian was a part of the prodceedings in the
"side-court" of a full public court hearing (see Fergus Kelly's
article on the setup of a full court hearing,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1484/J.Peri.3.129), which would generally be held
at an oenach.  Thus, contracts could possibly be made such that a
historian was necessary to validate any surety.

The next paragraph of the A text covers the honour price which is due
to a surety if the counter-party for which they went surety should
default on the contract.  After this it discusses what a surety can be
made for.  For example, "the surety does not go but with hereditary
property".  A commentary which follows this sentence states: "it is
against immovables which are the sureties".  Essentially, a surety
could only become a surety with immovables items.  This is a practical
solution as moveable items could be taken away in the night such as
cow herds and other smaller items.  Although, the proceedure for
distraint depends upon moveable things such as cow herds.

The last paragraph before the acsephelus end of the manuscript
describes the penalty for the heirs of a dead man who impung a
contract on the land.  In normal cirucmstances of the death of a
father, the sons divided the inherited land among themslves along the
maxim: "the youngest divides and the eldest chooses".  This intimates
that contracts on land could outlive the person who made it.  This
correlates nicely with the idea above that a surety goes for nine
generations.  For instance, a contractor's sons plus the progeny of
his surety would be legally bound by the contract long after the
contractor was dead.  I would speculate at this point that a contract
would enjoin the heirs when disposing of their inheritance.

* Pledges and Sureties in the Finnsruth Fíthail B Text

As I said earlier, the B text is mostly commentary.  In this case the
text is thus: CO BER BREITH IM TECHTA NGILL ⁊RL-.  As one will notice,
the last part is marked as "⁊RL-".  This stands for _et reliqua_ "and
the rest".  Basically, the line from Finnsruth Fíthail is used to
remind the reader of the law before launching into an extended
commentary.  "⁊RL-" is used several times within the commentary
itself.  It would seem that there was much more text avaliable to
which a judge may have had access or had memorized.  The commentary
itself is mostly in later Old Irish and early Middle Irish which is
based on the fact that there are independant pronouns in use and
petrified infix pronouns in certain verbs such as _atbeir_ "says" from
as-beir "to say".

Unfortunately, I haven't worked on this section as much as I have on
the A text so this will necessarily be a more tentative assesment of
the text.  However, what immeidately comes into focus from a
procedural point of view is that the commentary discusses _in fer
amuigh_ "plaintiff" and _in fer tall_ "defendant".  It also has the
defendant and plaintiff speak.  For instance, the defendant is made to
say: _"tainic" ar se "⁊ rotroiscestar, ⁊ targus gill ⁊ airgi do ⁊
nochar geib"_.  Other texts on legal proceedure such as Berrad
Airechta also feature places where legally formulatic phrases are
placed.  

* Conclusion 
